---
layout: post
title: "Rising Tides & the Open Horizon for ALM"
category: blog
authors:
 - surname: Lin
   given-names: Jennifer
   email: jlin@plos.org
 - surname: Fenner
   given-names: Martin
   orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1419-2405
   email: mfenner@plos.org
---

With support from the Sloan Foundation, PLOS hosted the [second annual
ALM workshop](http://article-level-metrics.plos.org/alm-workshop-2013/)
on Oct 10-12, 2013. Presentation slides and links to post-workshop
write-ups from the community have been linked
on [Lanyrd](http://lanyrd.com/2013/alm13/). Over 80 participants
registered for the 26 “black diamond” presentations in the first two
days of the program. And 20 people participated in the Data Challenge on
the closing day. We had representation from a wide spectrum of the
scholarly research ecosystem – researchers, publishers, academic
institutions, funders, technology providers, etc.

![Robert N. Dennis collection of stereoscopic views. / United States. /
States / Rhode Island. / Stereoscopic views, possibly of Newport, Rhode
Island, or vicinity.
](/assets/View_of_the_boats_in_the_ocean_from_Robert_N._Dennis_collection_of_stereoscopic_views.png)

*Robert N. Dennis collection of stereoscopic views. / United States. /
States / Rhode Island. / Stereoscopic views, possibly of Newport, Rhode
Island, or vicinity.*

Since the[ first ALM workshop](http://article-level-metrics.plos.org/alm-workshop-2012/) just
a year ago there have been exciting developments on a number of fronts.
We welcome you to revisit the [2012 technical
report](http://figshare.com/articles/ALM_Workshop_2012_Report.pdf/98828) documenting
where the conversation started. We have a richer body of knowledge to
draw on this year: more data to better understand the properties of
these emerging metrics, more analysis on the evolving behaviors of the
research community captured and revealed, and more demonstrations of
their application in research discovery and assessment. And yet it was
clearly expressed by all parties at the workshop that this is just the
beginning. We have only begun to develop, understand, and use these new
metrics.

We spent a lot of time listening to the conversations at the workshop,
and since then, thinking about future directions for the field. One way
to sum up our view of these occurences – no matter how disparate – is
with the following phrase taken from Adam Smith: **a rising tide lifts
all boats**. Certainly, there is an open horizon before us, but we
envision a number of developments over the course of the upcoming year.
These forecasts are encouraging ones, which will give buoyancy not just
to the individual  players currently in the ALM arena. They will benefit
all participants in scholarly research.

**ALM Data Environment**: we forecast an expansion in the suite of
metrics covered beyond the existing set to capture not only more
quantitative measures but also qualitative ones. We see more
bibliometrics research that will give the community clearer descriptions
of the ALM data from each source so that we can begin to parse out
meaning from the metrics.

We also expect to gain greater understanding of the impact that these
new metrics will have across the scholarly landscape (across fields,
institutions, geographies, etc.). We forecast more programmatic access
to the data and greater consolidation of data collection practices for
metrics across publishers. And lastly, we see a deepening sense of trust
for ALM data amongst the research community as data stewardship and data
integrity programs mature.

**Applications of ALM:** we expect more investment on behalf of
publishers and technology providers in finding novel ways to visualize
the data.  We also anticipate significant interest in making use of the
data for developing tools that support discoverability in scholarly
literature.

**Communications of ALM:** we forecast more formalized channels for the
sharing and reporting of these research metrics by researchers,
institutions, and funders, including evolving best practices for at
least some aspects of communicating ALM.

**Going beyond ALM**: lastly, we hope that we see more activity around
metrics that are not about articles, but other research outputs, from
monographs to research data to software.