---
layout: post
title: "Let’s stop wandering the altmetrics grocery store…"
category: blog
authors:
 - surname: Lin
   given-names: Jennifer
   email: jlin@plos.org
 - surname: Fenner
   given-names: Martin
   orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1419-2405
   email: mfenner@plos.org
---

As a research community, we have long gone hungry for ways to assess
research. With journal-based evaluation, we were feeding off of flies –
perfect for a frog but not enough for a researcher. Today, we have
entered into the golden era of the Altmetrics Grocery Store, filled with
a diversity of fresh produce. 

[![For All Your Grocery and Hardware
Needs: Maison Laurent!
(1905)](http://farm4.staticflickr.com/3337/3194325451_e3abfb45b9.jpg)](http://www.flickr.com/photos/postaletrice/3194325451/ "For All Your Grocery and Hardware Needs: Maison Laurent! (1905) by postaletrice, on Flickr")

*For All Your Grocery and Hardware Needs: Maison Laurent! (1905). [On
Flickr](http://www.flickr.com/photos/postaletrice/3194325451/), by Ana y
Esteban.*

The dangers of going shopping when hungry are tried and true. But
there’s no need to wander the grocery store once you have directions to
the food you need. We can erect signs in the aisles to figure out where
to go and what to buy. We can develop standard categories for the
growing set of altmetrics to give us the *right* – i.e., best suited for
our particular need – measurements of the type of impact for the
research outputs at hand.

What is in a *category*? First, it would subdivide the metrics into like
components. Secondly, it would inform the most appropriate use of the
new metrics in a way that is prudent and apropos to the activity
captured. And thirdly, the classifications overall provide a cohesive
structure to think about the whole kit and caboodle.

As we discuss in the article *Altmetrics in Evolution*, [published
Tuesday in Information Standards
Quarterly](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/lin/), PLOS
embarked on an effort to renegotiate all its existing categories used in
displaying its ALMs and forming the analytic infrastructure that power
the journals’ navigational tools. Timed with the publication of the
article, this week we have launched a redesigned metrics tab that uses
these new categories:

![Redesigned metrics tab for Why Most Published Research Findings Are
False.](/images/categories.png)

*Redesigned metrics tab for [Why Most Published Research Findings Are
False](http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124).*

You may have noticed that the renamed categories are the same as those
[used by
ImpactStory](http://blog.impactstory.org/2012/09/14/31524247207/) with
one important difference: we feel that we can’t clearly distinguish
between metrics showing scholarly vs. public impact. But we hope that
the article (and this blog post) help spark a discussion. Because we
want to maker it easier for people going into different grocery stores
to find the stuff they want. Not every store should look the same, but
maybe we can agree that we find cereals in one aisle and ice cream
somewhere else.

The article is part of a [special ISQ issue on
Altmetrics](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/), with a
total of five articles on the topic, an
[editorial](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/fenner/) by
one of us (Martin), and
a [report](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/nr1) about
the recently announced Sloan Altmetrics grant to NISO. The articles
touch on a variety of aspects:

-   Scott Chamberlain: [Consuming Article-Level Metrics: Observations
    and
    Lessons](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/chamberlain)
-   Robin Chin Roemer and Rachel Borchardt: [Institutional Altmetrics
    and Academic
    Libraries](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/roemer/)
-   Mike Taylor: [Exploring the Boundaries: How Altmetrics Can Expand
    Our Vision of Scholarly Communication and Social
    Impact](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/taylor/)
-   William Gunn: [Social Signals Reflect Academic Impact: What it Means
    When a Scholar Adds a Paper to
    Mendeley](http://www.niso.org/publications/isq/2013/v25no2/gunn/)

When you are done reading the articles, and are still hungry, head to
the PLOS ALM website to [register for the ALM
workshop](http://article-level-metrics.plos.org/alm-workshop-2013/) that
takes place October 10-11 in San Francisco. Because you know that San
Francisco is famous for its food, and a number of famous chefs have
already signed up to participate.