---
layout: post
title: "One Step Closer to Article-Level Metrics openly available for all Scholarly Content"
category: blog
authors:
 - surname: Lin
   given-names: Jennifer
   email: jlin@plos.org
 - surname: Fenner
   given-names: Martin
   orcid: http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1419-2405
   email: mfenner@plos.org
---

Since PLOS embarked on the Article-Level Metrics (ALM) work in 2009, we
have always imagined a future in which ALMs would be freely available
regardless of publisher. Metrics would be compiled to facilitate
comparisons between articles and add even greater value to the scholarly
community.

![doge](/assets/doge-300x300.jpeg)

PLOS built the ALM application to handle our own substantial publishing
enterprise, and it has been running well for us for almost exactly 5
years now. We made the [ALM software available as open source
software](https://github.com/articlemetrics/alm) in 2011, and last year
a number of [publishers have started to use the ALM
software](http://blogs.plos.org/plos/2013/10/even-more-journals-display-alms/)
for their own journals. As more publishers are expressing interest in
collecting and displaying the data, as well as the ongoing efforts to
discuss altmetrics standards and best practices, in particular the [NISO
Altmetrics
Initiative](http://www.niso.org/topics/tl/altmetrics_initiative/), we
have seen the discussion shift from WHAT (are ALMs and should we
care) to HOW (can we implement ALM)?

As part of this increased interest in ALM we today are launching the
[ALM community site](http://articlemetrics.github.io/). This site
contains a lot of content previously available in a number of separate
places, and we plan to add more content in the coming months. We like
the [Examples](http://articlemetrics.github.io/examples/) section which
showcases ALM visualizations of done with d3.js and R, with source code
and data openly available to make it easier for people to get started
using ALM data.

With the launch of the CrossRef Labs ALM application
[today](http://crosstech.crossref.org/2014/02/many-metrics-such-data-wow.html),
we get another big step closer to that goal. For the first time, the
latest ALMs will be available for journal articles and other content
items (books chapters, data, theses, technical reports) from thousands
of scholarly and professional publishers around the globe. The
publications span the entire spectrum of scholarly research, including
life sciences, physical sciences, humanities, social science, etc. As
this CrossRef Labs experiment is just getting started, it will take a
couple of months to begin collecting data for the 11 million+
publications from 2010 onwards, currently included. But there’s no need
to wait until then. We encourage everyone to start using the data that
has already been harvested, which is expanding to cover more of
CrossRef’s collection on a daily basis. All data are freely available
[online](http://alm.labs.crossref.org/articles) or via
[API](http://alm.labs.crossref.org/docs/API) for customized, bulk
requests.

We invite everyone across the scholarly research ecosystem –
researchers, bibliometricians, institutions, funders, librarians,
technology providers, etc. – to think big with us. Now that we have
systematic data about the activity surrounding research publications,
how do we turn it into useful information for discovery and evaluation?
This is a work in progress, not yet a formal service. But the launch of
the ALM application by CrossRef Labs is a monumental step towards making
ALMs an underlying and integral part of the infrastructure that supports
the research process and facilitates its progress.

When testing out the CrossRef Labs ALM application, please keep in mind
that this a lab experiment. Not only are there some differences in the
available data sources for a variety of reasons, but the number of
articles managed by the CrossRef Labs ALM application is larger by
orders of magnitude. So please be patient as you try out this new
resource. As an open source project, it is under active development, so
look out for continued improvements and new types of article activity
soon coming.